---
layout: post
title: filesys
date: 2022-09-25
---

First things first: 
What is computer?
An electronic device for storing, processing and computing data. Typically in form of binary taking instruction from code.

What is OS (Operating System)?
Operating System is a program that initially loaded into your computer (and your mobile phone too, you called it android/ios) by boot program,
manage all other application in your computer (and your mobile phone too). In addition we interect with it through GUI (graphical user interface) and CLI (comman line interface). 
You switch on your mobile phone it boots android then you unlock it and open whatsapp and send message to your best friend. 
Here andoid is os, whatsapp is a program like other that helps you to communicate with your friend. And all you are doing in a GUI.
Some extra bits; your laptop/desktop/mobile uses some kind of OS, mobile usually android develop by google, ios by apple.
And your laptop/desktop - linux/macos(by apple)/windows(by microsoft)
Every OS have their own way of doing things but conceptually they do the same. Some are flexible some are not. 

Okay! I know whoever reading this, knows about Input device, Output device, CPU, ROM, RAM. That's fantastic. 

Let's go the soul part - the software, specially I wants to talk about the fundamentals - 
  - Files
  - Folders 
  - Editor
  - Compiler/interpreter
  - Terminal emulator
  - Executable programs

Concept of files and folder:
What is file?
File is a piece of data; sequence of characters. The characters are 0's and 1's, but most often use as eight bits called "bytes" that 
mapped to printable character (01100100 = 99 = C) 
Make some simple text file on your Desktop; name it as "hello.txt" ~ that is a file called "hello" and it has an extension "txt" 
extension can be anything and it changeable. Well about file extension in a bit.
What is folder?
It contains one or several file or folder inside folder. Don't worry to interact with folder they are harmless. 
Make as some folder and try to understand how it helps organizing files.

Editors:
An editor is any program that manipulates  contest of the file. Any file for that matter it may be txt, music file, video file, executable file.
Editors is like pencil, eraser, pen and file is a piece of paper where you can add, modify, append or delete txt or content. 
e.g. Sublime text, Notepad++, Vim, Emacs so on so forth (I am user of Vim text editor, others swear by VS code, Emacs so on)

Compiler and Interpreter:
Compilers and interpreters are programs that take file as input and do something as instructed or intended to. 
It is like an instructor that taking instruction from the file.
for example if you want to calculate 2 numbers addition in Python language then it taking a file that has an instruction let assume file name is "add.py"
"add.py" contains:
a = 2
b = 3
sum = a + b #add two numbers 
print('The sum of {0} and {1} is {2}'. format(a, b, sum))
Output will be:
The sum of 2 and 3 is 5

Terminal emulator/command line tools:
A terminal is a invoking tool - that has a text-based interface for issuing commands to a computer. 
for example if you have a file called "myfile.txt", you can open it writing "vim myfile.txt". (Vim is an editor)

There are one commander that is a shells (e.g. Bash, Shell, Fish, Zsh etc) for this we are going to use Bash as a name of 
commander. For OS like unix is looks almost same, windows maybe different. You can think shells as commanding officer - here Bash, it can 
travel from one location to another, one folder to another invoke, open, command any files.

When we execute "vim myfile.txt", Bash looks around for the file "myfile.txt" in the directory (folder) that Bash happens to be in. 
If it sees "myfile.txt" in the current directory, it picks up that piece of file. Then, Bash looks for a command called vim. There is a Vim 
text editor on the system so Bash order Vim and read "myfile.txt" file. Vim does the thing.

Execution:
Programs are executable file, everything is piece of file or files - technically vim is also files, but we don't read vim, we use vim to read
or edit our files. Programs are meant to be read by machines, not you and me(they are not meant for editable). They are written in "machine code", run by your system.

Everything is program like Chrome, Firefox browser which you use right now for reading this.
How can we make things executable? This is out of scope, but on Linux, MacOS every file has a set of permission, that we can change using command. For windows system it is quite hard, actually I don't know. Maybe if you read this far you'll google. 
We can make those file executable. 

So there are actually lots of programs for various purpose - some for opening webpages and communicating with them (Chrome/Firefox), some for 
communication and social purpose (mail/instant messages), some for audio-visual works.

Sorry for my oversimplification of some terms. Ask via email.
