---
layout: post 
title: about running 
date: 2024-10-30
---

# Strange article from a previouly non-athletic person who love running for now (from 2023).

**Someone ask me what is the point of this hard-work, sweat, early morning waking up, feeling tired?**

I replyed running is about much more than just the race or an exercise. 
It is about discipline, self-mastery and pushing past the limits you once thought were impossible.
Waking up early, working hard, training consistently—all of that is a reflection of the drive to grow, to become stronger mentally and physically. 
Every km is a step toward self-discovery. 
The real reward isn't in the money, or become more fit, but in the resilience you build,
the peace you find, and the joy of knowing that every day you're becoming a better version of yourself.
Running teaches patience, persistence, and humility—it mirrors life itself.
The race may end, but the growth stays with you forever. And that is priceless.

`Training:
Run for fun for recreation,or for time goal and the professional/elite they do for living.
`

Shoes:
Do not ignore it; you really need good pair(s), it helps long term.
Maybe only downside of running for some, more run = more shoes, shhh maybe it rewarding. 
Bare minimum requirement: 
If mileage > 35-40 km/week better to have 2 pair of proper trainers. 
Race shoe for racing if affordablity have no issue. 
Always try to buy on discount (I never bought any running shoes at full price).
Fact: You can go with 1-2 years old model, toatally fine with that for trainers. 
E.g. Year 2024 Nike Pegasus 41 launched, you can buy Nike Pegasus 39-40 from 2022-23.  

Apparels: Less is more for running. Comfortability is crucial lightweight, moisture wicking fabric.  

Some markup for training:
1. Simplified training - just do it, most of us not lucky enough we have more things to do other than running.
2. Run as mileage
3. Obsession of consistency 
4. Do low impact as much as possible - gradual increase start slow
5. Eat more carb, protein, and water electrolyte so on so forth. 
6. Mentality to keep going, believe own self (do not need to take unnecessary pressure)
7. Try to keep the form (awareness of it from first to finish)
Will be elaborate and update in future.


About tempo run (Speed endurance):
Tempo is not a scientific term per se. It is continuous run (unbroken) near race pace as per your goal. - Comfortably hard.
Higher intensity than other runs e.g. easy or long runs.  
There is no rule for it like threshold runs, only means comfortably hard run; usually you can run day after tempo without much sore on legs.
It might be progression run or steady runs. 

How to make tempo successful? 
Building solid base of mileage, need the up the volume  according to your race / plan. Then progress to tempo run. 
Being consistant with the volume, then adding some intensity (e.g. intervals, hills so on so forth) then tempo.
Longer we hold tempo pace = longer we sustain goal race pace - from Hansons method.
Comfort and confidence at race pace. Acustomed with near goal feelings. 
Building up the volume -> Building up the volume near race pace tempo -> incorporate some tempo at long run.

About long run (with mental confidence by not stopping):
Be consistent with 2 hr long run each week for 3 months (3 weeks 1 week break and continue). 
Just feel comfortable each week and it became easier. 
Then next step speed incorporation, race pace incorporation with fast finish. Not to go into pain cave modulate it by feel.
If feel tough slow down on long run.  
Make it easier, fuel well, start easy get accustomed with 2 hrs then mark upto 25k. 
16 week 25k run every week 

About recovery run (strategic runs):
45 min - 1 hr (for pro 90 min or less).
1-1.30 min slower than race pace or even slower.
Effort should be relaxed, no target, only time on feet.
Whole point of recovery run is running economy, holding the fitness and mechanics / form.
Running economy / efficiency : less energy needed for same run from previous months and so on. 

Metrics to look after:
1. Mileage
2. Frequency of session (run per week)
3. Pace (just to hit some targets once each week, doesn't matter for complete begineer)

My strava: https://www.strava.com/athletes/104950341
